Enter command:Dictionary is empty
Enter command:Action list is empty
Enter command:Unrecognized command!
Enter command:Unknown cross-reference type!
Enter command:Could not read an integer!
Enter command:Could not read an integer!
Enter command:Minimum and maximum numbers must be 0 or positive!
Enter command:Minimum and maximum numbers must be 0 or positive!
Enter command:Maximum must be greater than or equal to minimum!
Enter command:Input document words:
None
Enter command:Enter input dictionary file name:11 words loaded
Enter command:Enter input document file name:Enter output document file name:
1: hTe bear said forcefully to hte moose,
"hTe" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Enter replacement:Do you want to replace this in rest of document? Enter y or n:"hTe" will be replaced by "The" in the rest of the document

1: The bear said forcefully to hte moose,
"forcefully" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Do you want to skip this in rest of document? Enter y or n:"forcefully" will be skipped for the rest of the document

1: The bear said forcefully to hte moose,
"hte" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Enter replacement:Do you want to replace this in rest of document? Enter y or n:"hte" will be replaced by "the" in the rest of the document

2: "I ate a bear, a walrus,and .... 
"ate" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:
4:       even a zebra!"
"even" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:
5: The moose said equally forcefully to hte bear, "I doubt
"equally" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Enter replacement:Do you want to replace this in rest of document? Enter y or n:
5: The moose said very forcefully to the bear, "I doubt
"doubt" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:
6: it."
"it" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Document statistics:
Number of words: 23
Longest word length: 10
Number of words containing at least one apostrophe: 0
Average letters per word: 4.3913
4 words were added to the dictionary
3 actions were specified
Enter command:aardvark
and
ate
bear
dingo
doubt
even
it
moose
said
saw
the
to
walrus
zebra
Dictionary statistics:
Number of words: 15
Longest word length: 8
Number of words containing at least one apostrophe: 0
Average letters per word: 4.13333
Enter command:Action list contains 3 actions:
Skip forcefully
Replace hTe with The
Replace hte with the
Enter command:Enter output dictionary file name:Output file could not be opened!
Enter command:Enter output dictionary file name:15 words saved
Enter command:Unrecognized command!
Enter command:Dictionary emptied
Action list emptied
Cross-references emptied
Enter command:Unrecognized command!
Enter command:Enter input document file name:Input file could not be opened!
Enter command:Enter input document file name:Document statistics:
Number of words: 19
Longest word length: 8
Number of words containing at least one apostrophe: 1
Average letters per word: 3.94737
16 words were added to the dictionary
Enter command:Done
