If the New England Patriots complete an unprecedented 19-0 sweep of the regular schedule and the Super Bowl XLII playoffs Sunday night, they will deserve to be hailed as the best one-season team in N.F.L. history. But as a dynasty, the House of Belichick will still trail the Vince Lombardi Packers of the ’60s and the Chuck Noll Steelers of the ’70s.

The measurement of a pro football dynasty is the equation involving the most championships in the fewest years. For all the hype that would surround the Patriots’ fourth Super Bowl ring in seven seasons, those Packers and Steelers were more dominant.

With Bart Starr at quarterback and Ray Nitschke at middle linebacker, those Packers earned five N.F.L. titles in seven seasons, including a record three straight that encompassed the first two Super Bowls. That reign was in jeopardy with 16 seconds remaining in the 1967 N.F.L. title game, the memorable Ice Bowl. With the Cowboys leading, 17-14, and the ball on the Dallas 1, Lombardi had to make a decision: kick the tying field goal or go for the touchdown.

“Run it and let’s get the hell out of here,” he said with a bark.

Behind guard Jerry Kramer’s block of tackle Jethro Pugh, Starr sneaked into the end zone and the Packers won, 21-17. Two weeks later, they routed the American Football League champion Oakland Raiders in Super Bowl II, Lombardi’s last game as the Packers’ coach.

•

Noll’s Steelers, with Terry Bradshaw at quarterback and Joe Greene at defensive tackle, delivered four trays of Super Bowl rings in six seasons.

If not for injuries to running backs Franco Harris and Rocky Bleier in a 40-14 rout of the Baltimore Colts in a playoff game, the 1976 Steelers might well have won the American Football Conference championship (instead of losing at Oakland, 24-7) and gone on to win a third straight Super Bowl for their owner, Art Rooney.

“We’ll never know, will we?” Rooney once said with a smile.

Just as we will never know if those Steelers or those Packers would beat these Patriots. You are talking about different teams from different eras who operated under different rules, notably the blocking techniques of offensive linemen and the coverage techniques of defensive backs.

As a group, the Patriots are mostly much bigger and faster than those Steelers and Packers, but are they better? We will never know.

And what about the other dynasties? The George Halas Bears of the ’40s, with Sid Luckman at quarterback, won four titles in seven seasons, beginning with their 73-0 embarrassment of the Redskins in the 1940 championship game. In avenging a 7-3 loss to Washington during the season, the Bears opened with running back Bill Osmanski’s 68-yard touchdown run on the second play from scrimmage and intercepted 8 passes, returning 3 for touchdowns.

As dazzling as the 49ers of the ’80s, built by Coach Bill Walsh with Joe Montana at quarterback and Ronnie Lott at safety, were in winning four Super Bowls, it took them nine seasons. After their third triumph, Walsh stepped aside in 1989 and George Seifert succeeded him, but Montana remained the common denominator. In a 55-10 rout of the Broncos in Super Bowl XXIV, he fired five touchdown passes.

“Montana is certainly bright enough,” Walsh once said. “But more important, he has athletic intelligence and outstanding spontaneous instincts, which help him identify opportunities and solve problems the instant they occur in a game.”

The Jimmy Johnson-Barry Switzer Cowboys of the ’90s won three Super Bowls in four seasons with an offense featuring Troy Aikman at quarterback, Emmitt Smith at running back and Michael Irvin at wide receiver.

The House of Belichick won three Super Bowls in four seasons in this decade (all three by the margin of an Adam Vinatieri field goal) and the Halas Bears of the ’40s also won three N.F.L. titles in four seasons.

During the ’50s, the Cleveland Browns and the Detroit Lions each won three N.F.L. titles in six seasons. Counting the Browns’ four straight All-America Football Conference championships from 1946 to 1949 before joining the N.F.L., they reigned as the best team in their league in 7 of 10 seasons (and went to the championship game in the other three), but N.F.L. records do not include statistics from the A.A.F.C. years.

In the N.F.L.’s early years, the Curly Lambeau Packers won five championships in 11 seasons: two in the 1936 and 1939 title games and three in a row from 1929 to 1931, when the champion was determined by the best record.