Enter command:Dictionary is empty
Enter command:Action list is empty
Enter command:Memory allocations:
0 strings with total allocation of 0 bytes
0 dictionary cells in use with total allocation of 3 cells requiring 12 bytes
0 action list cells in use with total allocation of 3 cells requiring 12 bytes
Enter command:Enter input dictionary file name:11 words loaded
Enter command:Enter input document file name:Enter output document file name:
hTe bear said forcefully to hte moose,

"hTe" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Enter replacement:Do you want to replace this in rest of document? Enter y or n:"hTe" will be replaced by "The" in the rest of the document

The bear said forcefully to hte moose,

"forcefully" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Do you want to skip this in rest of document? Enter y or n:"forcefully" will be skipped for the rest of the document

The bear said forcefully to hte moose,

"hte" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Enter replacement:Do you want to replace this in rest of document? Enter y or n:"hte" will be replaced by "the" in the rest of the document

"I ate a bear, a walrus,and .... 

"ate" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:
      even a zebra!"

"even" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:
The moose said equally forcefully to hte bear, "I doubt

"equally" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:Enter replacement:Do you want to replace this in rest of document? Enter y or n:
The moose said very forcefully to the bear, "I doubt

"doubt" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:
it."

"it" is not in the dictionary: Enter command:23 words processed in the input document
4 words were added to the dictionary
3 actions were specified
Enter command:Dictionary contains 15 words:
aardvark
and
ate
bear
dingo
doubt
even
it
moose
said
saw
the
to
walrus
zebra
Enter command:Action list contains 3 actions:
Skip forcefully
Replace hTe with The
Replace hte with the
Enter command:Enter output dictionary file name:Could not open file for output! Re-enter name:15 words saved
Enter command:Unrecognized command!
Enter command:Dictionary emptied
Action list emptied
Enter command:Unrecognized command!
Enter command:Enter input document file name:Could not open file for input! Re-enter name:Could not open file for input! Re-enter name:Could not open file for input! Re-enter name:19 words processed in the input document
16 words were added to the dictionary
Enter command:Done
